a doll construction having upper and lower generally hollow torso members adapted to be supported in an upright position along the longitudinal center line of the doll and to be pivoted with respect to each other about an axis disposed angularly at approximately 30 ° from the longitudinal center line . mating coacting ball and socket means are provided at the connecting midriff portions of the torsos and a flexible connector extends through a bushing aperture formed integrally with the ball to define the axis of pivoting , the connector being fixedly secured within one torso member and rotatably secured within the other , the connector maintaining the portions together under tension with the pivotal connection providing a large range of compound positions and relationships between the upper and lower torsos of the doll .
referring now to the drawings and particularly to fig1 - 3 , there is shown a doll construction including a lower torso member generally designated 12 and an upper torso member generally designated 14 , the upper torso member 14 being pivotally secured to the lower torso member 12 . the lower torso member 12 includes a front half 16 and a rear half 18 suitably interconnected with opposite surfaces 20 and 22 thereof being generally planar and having centrally aligned apertures 24 and 26 , respectively , formed therein for suitably receiving the hip connection means of leg members ( not shown ). the upper torso member 14 is likewise generally hollow and formed from two halves or shells including a rear half 28 and a front half 30 suitably joined and configured to form the chest and back surfaces of the doll . the upper portion of the upper torso terminates in a neck projection 32 to which is suitably secured a head ( not shown ). the rear and front torso halves 28 and 30 are also configured to provide socketed arm openings 34 and 36 adjacent the shoulder edges thereof for suitably receiving arm members ( not shown ). the upper surface of the lower torso member 12 terminates in a ball surface 38 at the midriff or waist portion of the lower torso member 12 where the two torso member portions are interconnected . the upper torso member 14 , as will hereinafter be described , terminates in a skirt portion 40 , which defines the waist or midriff portion thereof , the skirt portion 40 having an arcuately figure peripheral edge forming socket means to matingly coact and slide with respect to the ball surface 38 . as shown in dotted lines in fig2 a connecting member 42 has a washer - like end 44 and an enlarged head end 46 with an interconnecting shaft or shank portion 48 . a bushing aperture 50 is formed in the ball surface 38 and angularly disposed at 30 ° with respect to the longitudinal center line of the lower torso member 12 . the enlarged washer portion 44 of the connector 42 is fixedly secured to a pin 51 within the lower torso member 18 with the shank 48 extending in close abutting relation through the bushing aperture 50 for suitably broadly supporting the mid - portion of the shank 48 . the enlarged head portion 46 is rotatably secured within the upper torso member 14 to enable rotation of the upper torso member 14 with respect to the lower torso member 12 about an axis extending generally through the center of the shank 48 of the connecting member 42 . as illustrated in fig1 - 3 , the upper torso member 14 is rotated counterclockwise through an angle of approximately 15 to 25 degrees with respect to the lower torso member 12 resulting in an overall contour of the so - connected torso members 12 and 14 which effectively simulates a posed lifelike position with the back generally canted rearwardly of the longitudinal center line extending generally vertically through the center of the lower torso member 12 . with this pose , a line extending through the centers of the arm socket openings 34 and 36 will be angularly disposed with the right arm socket 34 slightly higher than the left arm socket 36 with reference to an upright position of a doll utilizing a doll construction . fig4 - 6 show right end , front end , left end views of the same relative position of the doll torso members relative to each other with the upper torso member 14 rotated clockwise with respect to the lower torso member 12 through the same angle depicted in fig1 - 3 . as can be seen by comparison of the views , as a consequence of the angularly disposed pivot axis defined by shank 48 of connecting member 42 , the relative posed positions of the upper and lower torso members with respect to each other is different , with the longitudinal center line of the upper torso member 14 being disposed at an angle forwardly of the longitudinal center line of the lower torso member 12 to cant the upper torso member 14 forwardly at a less acute angle . correspondingly , a line drawn between the centers of the arm sockets 34 and 36 will be angularly displaced only slightly relative to the angle created by rotation in the direction depicted in fig1 - 3 . the degree of forward and rearward inclination of the upper torso member 14 with respect to the lower torso member 12 will be determined by the amount of offset of the pivot axis , that is , the angle between the center of the shank 48 of the connecting member 42 and a line drawn through the longitudinal center line of the lower torso member 12 . referring now to fig7 and 8 , the details of construction will be discussed . fig7 illustrates the position of the parts during the assembly operation with the front torso half or shell 30 of the upper torso member 14 being positioned for access to the hollow interior thereof . similarly , the front half 16 of the lower torso member 12 is positioned with the open hollow interior thereof accessible . as can be seen , the skirt portion 40 is suitably reinforced and arcuately configured to permit mating engagement with the ball surface 38 formed integrally with the lower torso member 12 . the connector member 42 is a generally flexible neoprene member which has the washer end 44 thereof positioned over pin 51 of fixedly securing the connector member 42 thereto . for reference purposes the vertical line 8 - 8 extending through the centers of the upper torso members 14 and lower torso member 12 is the longitudinal center line previously referred to , and about which as viewed in the plan view of fig7 the outer peripheral contours of the torso are symmetrical with respect thereto when the upper torso member 14 is upright with respect to the lower torso member 12 as depicted in fig7 and 8 . this is the normal upright position of the doll . as can be seen , the pin 51 is generally disposed at the center of the ball surface 38 and on the longitudinal center line of the lower torso member 12 . at some angle , in this case 30 ° , with respect to the longitudinal center line , the bushing aperture 50 is configured integrally with the ball surface 38 and the shank portion 48 of the connecting member 42 passes therethrough in close engagement . extending generally perpendicular to the center line extending through shank 48 , a support member 54 is formed integrally on the interior surface of the front torso half 30 of the upper torso member 14 . the support member 54 has a generally planar upper surface and a cutout portion 56 at the free end thereof . the cutout 56 being arcuately configured for receiving therein a circular cross section portion of shank 48 with the enlarged head 46 of connecting member 42 having the undersurface thereof abuttingly engaging the planar surface of support member 54 . during the assembly , the connecting member 42 is stretched until this engagement is effected with the socket means of a skirt portion 40 being maintained in abutting engagement with the ball surface 38 under tension due to the resilience of connecting member 42 . with the connecting member positioned as shown in fig7 the rear half 18 of the lower torso member 12 is then assembled to the front half 16 by means of aligned pin and socket connector members 58 which can be suitably joined by welding or adhesive or the like . similarly , the rear half 28 of the upper torso member 14 is secured to the front half 30 thereof by other pin and socket connectors 60 . a projection 62 formed on the interior surface of the rear half 28 of upper torso member 14 is adapted to align with the cutout 56 of support member 54 for retention of the shank 48 of connector member 42 therein . with the construction shown , the connecting member 42 maintains the upper torso 14 in tension with the lower torso member 12 with the peripheral skirt portion 40 of the upper torso matingly engaging the ball surface 38 . with the connector member 42 being resilient and generally flexible and suitably supported at the midpoint thereof by support bushing aperture 50 , the portion of shank 48 extending upwardly from the bushing aperture 50 is free to bend or flex without breaking if a child attempts to displace the upper torso member 14 in some direction other than rotation about the pivotal axis through shank 48 . furthermore , due to the tension of connecting member 42 , the broad bearing surface of the enlarged head portion 46 abutting against the planar surface of support member 54 provides torsional resistance to rotation as well as maintaining the parts in alignment when posed . with rigid connectors often times , after repeated usage , a sloppy fit results whereby the upper torso position with respect to the lower torso is changed by the slightest touch . while the shank portion 48 has been illustrated to be circular in cross section with a corresponding cross section of aperture 50 , the configuration of the connection member 42 as depicted is not limiting inasmuch as there is no rotation of the shank 48 within the aperture 50 except for some twisting movement that may be encountered during rotation of the parts relative to each other . essentially , the doll construction shown and described with the pivot axis about which the upper torso member 14 rotates with respect to the lower torso member 12 being angularly displaced with respect to the longitudinal center line of the torsos to provide a wide range of lifelike positions for posing the doll . while there has been shown and described a preferred embodiment it is to be understood that various other adaptations and modifications may be made within the spirit and scope of the invention .
